# STAC Catalog Best Practices

This document makes a number of recommendations for creating real world SpatioTemporal Asset Catalogs. None of them 
are required to meet the core specification, but following these practices will make life easier for client tooling
and for users. They come about from practical experience of implementors, and introduce a bit more 'constraint' for
those who are creating new catalogs or new tools to work with STAC. 

In time some of these may evolve to become part of the core specification, but while the current goal of the core is to remain 
quite flexible and simple to meet a wide variety of use cases.

[Work In Progress]

## Catalog Layout

Creating a catalog involves a number of decisions as to what folder structure to use to represent sub-catalogs, items
and assets, and how to name them. The specification leaves this totally open, and you can link things as you want. We
encourage people to explore new structures. But the following are what a number of implementors ended up doing. Following
these recommendations makes for more legible catalogs.

1. Root documents (catalogs / collections) should be at the root of a directory tree containing the static catalog.
2. Catalogs should be named `catalog.json` (cf. `index.html`).
3. Collections that are distinct from catalogs should be named `collection.json`.
4. Items should be named `<id>.json`
5. Sub-catalogs should be stored in subdirectories of their parent (and only 1 subdirectory deeper than a document's parent) (e.g. `.../sample/sub1/catalog.json`).
6. Items should be stored in subdirectories of their parent catalog (e.g. `.../sample/sub1/3425/3425.json`). 
This means that each item and its assets are contained in a unique subdirectory
7. Limit the number of items in a catalog or sub-catalog, grouping / partitioning as relevant to the dataset

### Dynamic Catalog Layout

While these recommendations were primarily written for [static catalogs](catalog-spec.md#static-catalogs), they apply
equally well to [dynamic catalogs](catalog-spec.md#dynamic-catalogs). Subdirectories of course would just be URL paths 
generated dynamically, but the structure would be the same as is recommended.

One benefit of a dynamic catalog is that it can generate various 'views' of the catalog, exposing the same Items in 
different sub-catalog organization structures. For example one catalog could divide sub-catalogs by date and another 
by providers, and users could browse down to both. The leaf Items should just be linked to in a single canonical location 
(or at least use a rel link that indicates the location of the canonical one). It is recommended that dynamic catalogs 
provide multiple 'views' to allow users to navigate in a way that makes sense to them, providing multiple 'sub-catalogs'
from the root catalog that enable different paths to browse (country/state, date/time, constellation/satellite, etc). But the 
canonical 'rel' link should be used to designate the primary location of the item to search engine crawlers.

## Use of links

The main catalog specification allows both relative and absolute links, and says that `self` links are not required, but are 
strongly recommended. This is what the spec must say to enable the various use cases, but there is more subtlety for when it 
is essential to use different link types. The best practice is to use one of the below 
catalog types, applying the link recommendations consistently, instead of just haphazardly applying anything the spec allows.

### Self-contained Catalogs

A 'self-contained catalog' is one that is designed for portability. Users may want to download a catalog from online and be
able to use it on their local computer, so all links need to be relative. Or a tool that creates catalogs may need to work 
without knowing the final location that it will live at online, so it isn't possible to set absolute 'self' URL's. These use
cases should utilize a catalog that follows the listed principles:

* **Only relative href's in `links`**: The full catalog structure of links down to sub-catalogs and items, and their 
links back to their parents and roots, should be done with relative URL's. This enables the full catalog to be downloaded or
copy to another location and to still be valid. This also implies no `self` link, as that link must be absolute.

* **Use Asset `href` links consistently**: The links to the actual assets are allowed to be either relative or absolute. There
are two types of 'self-contained catalogs'. The first is just the metadata, and use absolute href links to refer to the 
online locations of the assets. The second uses relative href links for the assets, and includes them in the folder structure.
This enables offline use of a catalog, by including all the actual data.

Self-contained catalogs tend to be used more as static catalogs, where they can be easily passed around. But often they will
be generated by a more dynamic STAC service, enabling a subset of a catalog or a portion of a search criteria to be downloaded
and used in other contexts. That catalog could be used offline, or even published in another location.

Self-contained catalogs are not just for offline use, however - they designed to be able to be published online and to live
on the cloud in object storage. They just aim to ease the burden of publishing, by not requiring lots of updating of links. 
Adding a single `self` link at the root is recommended for online catalogs, turning it into a 'relative published catalog', as detailed below. This anchors it in an online location and enable provenance tracking.

### Published Catalogs

A 'published catalog' is one that lives online in a stable location, and uses `self` links to establish its location and 
enable easy provenance tracking. There are two types of published catalogs:

* **Absolute Published Catalog** is a catalog that uses absolute links for everything, both in the `links` objects and in the
`asset` hrefs. It includes `self` links for every item. Generally these are implemented by dynamic catalogs, as it is quite
easy for them to generate the proper links dynamically. But a static catalog that knows its published location could easily
implement it.
* **Relative Published Catalog** is a catalog that uses relative links for everything, but includes an absolute `self` link at
the root catalog, to identify its online location. This is designed so that a self-contained catalog can be 'published' online
by just adding one field (the self link) to its root catalog. All the other links should remain relative.

## Static to Dynamic best practices

Many implementors are using static catalogs to be the reliable core of their dynamic services, or layering their STAC API
on top of any static catalog that is published. These are some recommendations on how to handle this:

#### Ingestion and links

Implementors have found that it's best to 'ingest' a static STAC into an internal datastore (often elasticsearch, but a 
traditional database could work fine too) and then generate the full STAC API responses from that internal representation.
There were attempts to have the API refer directly to the static STAC Items, but maintaining the link structure in a 
coherent way was difficult. So the recommendation is to create new absolute links, at least for the STAC search/ endpoint 
responses, with the API's location at the base url. The /stac endpoint with the catalogs could either link directly
to the static catalog, or can follow the 'dynamic catalog layout' recommendations above with a new set of URL's.

Ideally each `Item` would use its `links` to provide a reference back to the static location. The location of the static
item should be treated as the canonical location, as the generated API is more likely to move or be temporarily down. The
spec provides the `derived_from` rel attribute, which fits well enough, but `canonical` is likely the more appropriate one
as everything but the links should be the same.

#### Keeping static and dynamic catalogs in sync with cloud notification and queue services

There is a set of emerging practices to use services like Amazon's Simple Queue Service (SQS) and Simple Notification Service
(SNS) to keep catalogs in sync. There is a great [blog post on the CBERS STAC implementation on AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/publicsector/keeping-a-spatiotemporal-asset-catalog-stac-up-to-date-with-sns-sqs/). The core 
idea is that a static catalog should emit a notification whenever it changes. The recommendation for SNS is to use message 
body as the STAC item JSON itself, with some attributes such as a scene’s datetime and geographic bounding box that allows 
basic geographic filtering from listeners. 

The dynamic STAC API would then listen to the notifications and update its internal datastore whenever new data comes into
the static catalog. Implementors have had success using AWS Lambda to do a full 'serverless' updating of the elasticsearch
database, but it could just as easily be a server-based process.



